feat: release 0.5.0 (#7238)
ipfs/go-ipfs: CHANGELOG.md

# go-ipfs changelog

## 0.5.0 2020-04-28

We're excited to announce go-ipfs 0.5.0! This is by far the largest go-ipfs release with ~2500 commits, 98 contributors, and over 650 PRs across ipfs, libp2p, and multiformats.

### Highlights

#### Content Routing

The primary focus of this release was on improving content routing. That is, advertising and finding content. To that end, this release heavily focuses on improving the DHT.

##### Improved DHT

The distributed hash table (DHT) is how IPFS nodes keep track of who has what data. The DHT implementation has been almost completely rewritten in this release. Providing, finding content, and resolving IPNS records are now all much faster. However, there are risks involved with this update due to the significant amount of changes that have gone into this feature.

> The current DHT suffers from three core issues addressed in this release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The old DHT suffered from three core issues addressed in this release:
```

> - Most peers in the DHT cannot be dialed (e.g., due to firewalls and NATs). Much of a DHT query time is wasted trying to connect to peers that cannot be reached.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Most peers in the DHT cannot be dialed (e.g., due to firewalls and NATs). Much of a DHT query's time is wasted trying to connect to peers that cannot be reached.
```

> - Most peers in the DHT cannot be dialed (e.g., due to firewalls and NATs). Much of a DHT query time is wasted trying to connect to peers that cannot be reached.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Most peers in the DHT cannot be dialed (e.g., due to firewalls and NATs), which previously meant much of a DHT query time was wasted trying to connect to peers that could not be reached.
```

> - The DHT query logic doesn't properly terminate when it hits the end of the query and, instead, aggressively keeps on searching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The DHT query logic didn't properly terminate when it hit the end of the query and, instead, aggressively kept on searching.
```

> - The routing tables are poorly maintained. This can cause a search that should be logarithmic in the size of the network to be linear.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The routing tables are poorly maintained. This can cause search performance to slow down linearly with network size, instead logarithimicaly as expected.
```

> - The routing tables are poorly maintained. This can cause a search that should be logarithmic in the size of the network to be linear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The routing tables were poorly maintained, which could cause a search that _should_ be logarithmic in the size of the network to instead be linear.
```

> ###### Reachable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Reachability
```

> ###### Reachable

Author: ```suggestion
###### Reachability
```

We have addressed the problem of undialable nodes by having nodes wait to join the DHT as _server_ nodes until they've confirmed that they are reachable from the public internet.

> To ensure that nodes which are not publicly reachable (ex behind VPNs, offline LANs, etc.) can still coordinate and share data, Go-IPFS 0.5 will run two DHTs: one for private networks and one for the public internet. Every node will participate in a LAN DHT and a public WAN DHT. See [Dual DHT](#dual-dht) for more details.

Reviewer 2: There is inconsistent usage of `Go-IPFS` and `go-ipfs`

###### Dual DHT

All IPFS nodes will now run two DHTs: one for the public internet WAN, and one for their local network LAN.

1. When connected to the public internet, IPFS will use both DHTs for finding peers, content, and IPNS records. Nodes only publish provider and IPNS records to the WAN DHT to avoid flooding the local network.
2. When not connected to the public internet, nodes publish provider and IPNS records to the LAN DHT.

The WAN DHT includes all peers with at least one public IP address. This release will only consider an IPv6 address public if it is in the [public internet range `2000::/3`](https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipv6-address-space/ipv6-address-space.xhtml).

This feature should not have any noticeable impact on Go-IPFS, performance, or otherwise. Everything should continue to work in all the currently supported network configurations: VPNs, disconnected LANs, public internet, etc.

###### Query Logic

We've improved the DHT query logic to more closely follow Kademlia. This should significantly speed up:

- Publishing IPNS & provider records.
- Resolving IPNS addresses.

> Previously, nodes would continue searching till they timed out or ran out of peers before stopping (putting or returning data found). Now, nodes will now stop as soon as they find the closest peers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, nodes would continue searching till they timed out or ran out of peers before stopping (putting or returning data found). Now, nodes will stop as soon as they find the closest peers.
```

###### Routing Tables

Finally, we've addressed the poorly maintained routing tables by:

- Reducing the likelihood that the connection manager will kill connections to peers in the routing table.
- Keeping peers in the routing table, even if we get disconnected from them.
- Actively and frequently querying the DHT to keep our routing table full.
- Prioritizing useful peers that respond to queries quickly.

##### Testing

The DHT rewrite was made possible by [Testground](https://github.com/ipfs/testground/), our new testing framework. Testground allows us to spin up multi-thousand node tests with simulated real-world network conditions. By combining Testground and some custom analysis tools, we were able to gain confidence that the new DHT implementation behaves correctly.

##### Provider Record Changes

When you add content to your IPFS node, you advertise this content to the network by announcing it in the DHT. We call this "providing".

> However, go-ipfs has multiple ways to address the same underlying bytes. Specifically, we address content by content ID (CID) and the same underlying bytes can be addressed using (a) two different versions of CIDs (CIDv1 and CIDv2) and (b) with different "codecs" depending on how we're interpreting the data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, go-ipfs has multiple ways to address the same underlying bytes. Specifically, we address content by content ID (CID) and the same underlying bytes can be addressed using (a) two different versions of CIDs (CIDv0 and CIDv1) and (b) with different "codecs" depending on how we're interpreting the data.
```

Prior to go-ipfs 0.5.0, we used the content id (CID) in the DHT when sending out provider records for content. Unfortunately, this meant that users trying to find data announced using one CID wouldn't find nodes providing the content under a different CID.

In go-ipfs 0.5.0, we're announcing data by _multihash_, not _CID_. This way, regardless of the CID version used by the peer adding the content, the peer trying to download the content should still be able to find it.

> **Warning:** as part of the network, this could impact finding content added with CIDv1. Because go-ipfs 0.5.0 will announce and search for content using the bare multihash (equivalent to the v0 CID), go-ipfs 0.5.0 will be unable to find CIDv1 content published by nodes prior to go-ipfs 0.5.0 and vice-versa. As CIDv1 is _not_ enabled by default so we believe this will have minimal impact. However, users are _strongly_ encouraged to upgrade as soon as possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Warning:** as part of the network, this could impact finding content added with CIDv1. Because go-ipfs 0.5.0 will announce and search for content using the bare multihash (equivalent to the v0 CID), go-ipfs 0.5.0 will be unable to find CIDv1 content published by nodes prior to go-ipfs 0.5.0 and vice-versa. As CIDv1 is _not_ enabled by default we believe this will have minimal impact. However, users are _strongly_ encouraged to upgrade as soon as possible.
```

#### Content Transfer

A secondary focus in this release was improving content _transfer_, our data exchange protocols.

##### Refactored Bitswap

This release includes a major [Bitswap refactor](https://blog.ipfs.io/2020-02-14-improved-bitswap-for-container-distribution/), running a new and backward compatible Bitswap protocol. We expect these changes to improve performance significantly.

With the refactored Bitswap, we expect:

- Few to no duplicate blocks when fetching data from other nodes speaking the _new_ protocol.
- Better parallelism when fetching from multiple peers.

> The new Bitswap won't magically make downloading content any faster until both seeds and leaches have updated. If you're one of the first to upgrade to `0.5.0` and try downloading from peers that haven't upgraded, you're unlikely to see much of a performance improvement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new Bitswap won't magically make downloading content any faster until **both** seeds and leaches have updated. If you're one of the first to upgrade to `0.5.0`, make sure your peers upgrade as well in order to see the performance improvement.
```

[bitswap-refactor]: https://blog.ipfs.io/2020-02-14-improved-bitswap-for-container-distribution/

##### Server-Side Graphsync Support (Experimental)

Graphsync is a new exchange protocol that operates at the IPLD Graph layer instead of the Block layer like bitswap.

For example, to download "/ipfs/QmExample/index.html":

> * Bitswap would download QmFoo, lookup "index.html" in the directory named by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Bitswap would download "QmFoo", lookup "index.html" in the directory named by
```

> QmFoo, resolving it to a CID QmIndex. Finally, bitswap would download QmIndex.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"QmFoo", and resolve it to a CID "QmIndex". Finally, Bitswap would download "QmIndex".
```

* Graphsync would ask peers for "/ipfs/QmFoo/index.html". Specifically, it would ask for the child named "index.html" of the object named by "QmFoo".

This saves us round-trips in exchange for some extra protocol complexity. Moreover, this protocol allows specifying more powerful queries like "give me everything under QmFoo". This can be used to quickly download a large amount of data with few round-trips.

At the moment, go-ipfs cannot use this protocol to download content from other peers. However, if enabled, go-ipfs can _serve_ content to other peers over this protocol. This may be useful for pinning services that wish to quickly replicate client data.

To enable, run:

```bash
> ipfs config --json Experimental.GraphsyncEnabled true
```

#### Datastores

> Continuing on with the of improving our core data handling subsystems, both of the datastores used in go-ipfs, badger and flatfs, have received important updates in this release:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Continuing on with improving our core data handling subsystems, both of the datastores used in go-ipfs, Badger and FlatFS, have received important updates in this release:
```

> Continuing on with the of improving our core data handling subsystems, both of the datastores used in go-ipfs, badger and flatfs, have received important updates in this release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Continuing on with the theme of improving our core data handling subsystems, both of the datastores used in go-ipfs, badger and flatfs, have received important updates in this release:
```

##### Badger

> Badger has been in go-ipfs for over a year as an experimental feature, and we're promoting it to stable (but not default). For this release, we've switched from writing to disk synchronously to explicitly syncing where appropriate, significantly increasing write throughput.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Badger has been in go-ipfs for over a year as an experimental feature, and we're now promoting it to stable (but not default). For this release, we've switched from writing data to disk synchronously, to explicitly syncing updates where appropriate - significantly increasing write throughput.
```

The benefit of Badger is that adding/fetching data to/from Badger is significantly faster than adding/fetching data to/from the default datastore, FlatFS. In some tests, adding data to Badger is 32x faster than FlatFS (in this release).

###### Enable Badger

In this release, we're marking the badger datastore as stable. However, we're not yet enabling it by default. You can enable it at initialization by running: `ipfs init --profile=badgerds`

###### Issues with Badger

While Badger is a great solution, there are some issues you should consider before enabling it.

Badger is complicated. FlatFS pushes all the complexity down into the filesystem itself. That means that FlatFS is only likely to lose your data if your underlying filesystem gets corrupted while there are more opportunities for Badger itself to get corrupted.

Badger can use a lot of memory. In this release, we've tuned Badger to use `~20MB` of memory by default. However, it can still produce spikes as large as [`1GiB` of data](https://github.com/dgraph-io/badger/issues/1292) in memory usage when garbage collecting.

> Finally, badger isn't very aggressive when it comes to garbage collection, and we're still investigating ways to get it to more aggressively clean up after itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, Badger isn't very aggressive when it comes to garbage collection, and we're still investigating ways to get it to more aggressively clean up after itself.
```

We suggest you use Badger if:

- Performance is your main requirement.
- You rarely delete anything.
- You have some memory to spare.

> ##### Flatfs

Reviewer 2: There are case discrepancies with Badger and FlatFS
```suggestion
##### FlatFS
```

Unfortunately, `/ipfs/Qm...` is _also_ the same path format we use for files. This release, changes the multiaddr format from <code>/ip4/193.45.1.24/tcp/4001/<b>ipfs</b>/QmSomePeerID</code> to <code>/ip4/193.45.1.24/tcp/4001/<b>p2p</b>/QmSomePeerID</code> to make the distinction clear.

What this means for users:

* Old-style multiaddrs will still be accepted as inputs to IPFS.
* If you were using a multiaddr library (go, js, etc.) to name _files_ because `/ipfs/QmSomePeerID` looks like `/ipfs/QmSomeFile`, your tool may break if you upgrade this library.
* If you're manually parsing multiaddrs and are searching for the string `/ipfs/`..., you'll need to search for `/p2p/...`.

##### Minimum RSA Key Size

Previously, IPFS did not enforce a minimum RSA key size. In this release, we've introduced a minimum 2048 bit RSA key size. IPFS generates 2048 bit RSA keys by default so this shouldn't be an issue for anyone in practice. However, users who explicitly chose a smaller key size will not be able to communicate with new nodes.

> Unfortunately, the some of the bootstrap peers _did_ intentionally generate 1024 bit RSA keys so they'd have vanity peer addresses (starting with QmSoL for "solar net"). All IPFS nodes should _also_ have peers with >= 2048 bit RSA keys in their bootstrap list, but we've introduced a migration to ensure this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the some of the bootstrap peers _did_ intentionally generate 1024 bit RSA keys so they'd have vanity peer addresses (starting with QmSoL for "solar net"). All IPFS nodes should _also_ have peers with >= 2048 bit RSA keys in their bootstrap list, but we've introduced a migration to ensure this.
```
```suggestion
Unfortunately, some of the bootstrap peers _did_ intentionally generate 1024 bit RSA keys so they'd have vanity peer addresses (starting with QmSoL for "solar net"). All IPFS nodes should _also_ have peers with >= 2048 bit RSA keys in their bootstrap list, but we've introduced a migration to ensure this.
```

We implemented this change to follow security best practices and to remove a potential foot-gun. However, in practice, the security impact of allowing insecure RSA keys should have been next to none because IPFS doesn't trust other peers on the network anyways.

##### TLS By Default

In this release, we're switching TLS to be the _default_ transport. This means we'll try to encrypt the connection with TLS before re-trying with SECIO.

> Contrary to the announcement in the go-ipfs 0.4.23 release notes, this release does not remove SECIO support to maintain compatibility with js-ipfs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contrary to the announcement in the go-ipfs 0.4.23 release notes, this release does not remove SECIO support in order to maintain compatibility with js-ipfs.
```

Note: The `Experimental.PreferTLS` configuration option is now ignored.

##### SECIO Deprecation Notice

SECIO should be considered to be well on the way to deprecation and will be
completely disabled in either the next release (0.6.0, ~mid May) or the one
following that (0.7.0, ~end of June). Before SECIO is disabled, support will be
added for the NOISE transport for compatibility with other IPFS implementations.

##### QUIC Upgrade

If you've been using the experimental QUIC support, this release upgrades to a new and _incompatible_ version of the QUIC protocol (draft 27). Old and new go-ipfs nodes will still interoperate, but not over the QUIC transport.

We intend to standardize on this draft of the QUIC protocol and enable QUIC by default in the next release if all goes well.

NOTE: QUIC does not yet support [private networks](./docs/experimental-features.md#private-networks).

#### Gateway

In addition to a bunch of bug fixes, we've made two improvements to the gateway.

You can play with both of these features by visiting:

> > http://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.io/

Reviewer 4: https://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.dweb.link

> > http://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.io/

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> https://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.dweb.link
```

##### Subdomain Gateway

First up, we've changed how URLs in the IPFS gateway work for better browser
security. The gateway will now redirect from
`http://localhost:5001/ipfs/CID/...` to `http://CID.ipfs.localhost:5001/...` by
default. This:

* Ensures that every dapp gets its own browser origin.

> * Makes it easier to write websites that "just work" with IPFS because absolute paths will now work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Makes it easier to write websites that "just work" with IPFS because absolute paths will now work (though you should still use relative links because they're better).
```

  
Paths addressing the gateway by IP address (`http://127.0.0.1:5001/ipfs/CID`) will not be altered as IP addresses can't have subdomains.

Note: cURL doesn't follow redirects by default. To avoid breaking cURL and other clients that don't support redirects, go-ipfs will return the requested file along with the redirect. Browsers will follow the redirect and abort the download while cURL will ignore the redirect and finish the download.

##### Directory Listing

> The second feature is face-lift to the directory listing theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second feature is a face-lift to the directory listing theme.
```

> > http://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.io/

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> https://bafybeia6po64b6tfqq73lckadrhpihg2oubaxgqaoushquhcek46y3zumm.ipfs.dweb.link/
```

##### ENS

IPFS now resolves [ENS](https://ens.domains/) names (e.g., [/ipns/ipfs.eth](https://ipfs.eth.dweb.link)) via DNSLink.

##### IPNS over PubSub

IPFS has had experimental support for resolving IPNS over pubsub for a while. However, in the past, this feature was passive. When resolving an IPNS name, one would join a pubsub topic for the IPNS name and subscribe to _future_ updates. Unfortunately, this wouldn't speed-up initial IPNS lookups.

In this release, we've introduced a new "record fetch" protocol to speedup the initial lookup. Now, after subscribing to the pubsub topic for the IPNS key, nodes will use this new protocol to "fetch" the last-seen IPNS record from all peers subscribed to the topic.

This feature will be enabled by default in 0.6.0.

##### IPNS with base32 PIDs

IPNS names can now be expressed as special multibase CIDs. E.g., 

> /ipns/bafzbeibxfjp4gaxc4cdn57257cyvc7jfa4rlp4e5min6geg44m57g6nx7e

Importantly, this allows IPNS names to appear in subdomains in the new [subdomain gateway](#subdomain-gateway) feature.

#### PubSub

We have made two major changes to the pubsub subsystem in this release:

> 1. Pubsub now more aggressively finds and connects to other peers peers subscribing to the same topic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Pubsub now more aggressively finds and connects to other peers subscribing to the same topic.
```

> 2. Go-ipfs has switched its the default pubsub router from "floodsub", an inefficient but simple "flooding" pubsub implementation, to "gossipsub".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Go-ipfs has switched the default pubsub router from "floodsub", an inefficient but simple "flooding" pubsub implementation, to "gossipsub".
```
